Update user guides and docs regarding tasks using Java toolchains (#22985)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/jvm/toolchains.adoc

[[toolchains]]
= Toolchains for JVM projects

Working on multiple projects can require interacting with multiple versions of the Java language.

> Even within a single project different parts of the codebase may be fixed to a certain language level due to backward compatibility requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even within a single project, different parts of the codebase may be fixed to a particular language level due to backward compatibility requirements.
```

> Because of this, different versions of the same tools (a toolchain) must be installed and managed on each machine that builds the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means different versions of the same tools (a toolchain) must be installed and managed on each machine that builds the project.
```

A **Java toolchain** is a set of tools to build and run Java projects, which is usually provided by the environment via local JRE or JDK installations.
Compile tasks may use `javac` as their compiler, test and exec tasks may use the `java` command while `javadoc` will be used to generate documentation.

By default, Gradle uses the same Java toolchain for running Gradle itself and building JVM projects.

> However, this may not be always desirable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this may only sometimes be desirable.
```

Reviewer: it is always best to choose positive terms. People don't want to know what "not" to do.

Building projects with different Java versions on different developer machines and CI servers may lead to unexpected issues.
Additionally, you may want to build a project using a Java version that is not supported for running Gradle.

> In order to improve reproducibility of the builds and make build requirements clearer, Gradle allows to configure toolchains on both project and task level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to improve the reproducibility of the builds and make build requirements clearer, Gradle allows configuring toolchains on both project and task levels.
```

[[sec:consuming]]
== Toolchains for projects

> A build can globally define what toolchain it targets by stating the Java language version it needs:

Reviewer 2: You added project to the title, to clarify scope. I would then remove "build" from here as we are discussing project level configuration.

And we might want one day to introduce a toolchain block in settings to have real build level configuration.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/java/toolchain-basic/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=toolchain]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/java/toolchain-basic/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=toolchain]"]
====

Executing the build (e.g. using `gradle check`) will now handle several things for you and others running your build:

1. Gradle configures all compile, test and javadoc tasks to use the defined toolchain.
2. Gradle detects <<#sec:auto_detection,locally installed toolchains>>.
3. Gradle chooses a toolchain matching the requirements (any Java 17 toolchain for the example above).

> 4. If no matching toolchain is found, Gradle will automatically download a matching one based on the configured <<#sub:download_repositories,toolchain download repositories>>.

Reviewer 2: I would replace "will" with "can" since in Gradle 8, this requires to opt-in by adding and configuring a settings plugin

Usage of _invalid_ instances of `JavaToolchainSpec` results in a build error since Gradle 8.0.

== Toolchains for tasks

In case you want to tweak which toolchain is used for a specific task, you can specify the exact tool a task is using.
For example, the `Test` task exposes a `JavaLauncher` property that defines which java executable to use for launching the tests.

In the example below, we configure all java compilation tasks to use Java 8.

> Additionally, we introduce a new `Test` task that is going to run our unit tests but using a JDK 17.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, we introduce a new `Test` task that will run our unit tests using a JDK 17.
```

[[sec:plugins]]
== Toolchains for plugin authors

> When creating a plugin or a task that uses toolchains it is important to provide sensible defaults, as well as to allow users to override them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a plugin or a task that uses toolchains, it is essential to provide sensible defaults and allow users to override them.
```

> For JVM projects it is usually safe to assume that `java` plugin has been applied to the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For JVM projects, it is usually safe to assume that the `java` plugin has been applied to the project.
```

> In such a case, it is appropriate to use the toolchain defined via the `java` extension as a default value for the tool property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such a case, using the toolchain defined via the `java` extension as a default value for the tool property is appropriate.
```

> This way the users will need to configure the toolchain only once on the project level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way, the users will need to configure the toolchain only once on the project level.
```

The example below showcases how to use the default toolchain as convention while allowing users to individually configure the toolchain per task.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/java/toolchain-task/kotlin/",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=custom-toolchain-task-with-java]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/java/toolchain-task/groovy/",files="build.gradle[tags=custom-toolchain-task-with-java]"]
====
<1> We declare a `JavaLauncher` property on the task.

> It is important that the property is marked as a <<more_about_tasks.adoc#sec:task_input_nested_inputs,`@Nested` input>> to make sure the task is responsive to toolchain changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The property must be marked as a <<more_about_tasks.adoc#sec:task_input_nested_inputs,`@Nested` input>> to make sure the task is responsive to toolchain changes.
```

<2> We obtain the toolchain spec from the `java` extension to use it as a default.
<3> Using the `JavaToolchainService` we get a provider of the `JavaLauncher` that matches the toolchain.
<4> Finally, we wire the launcher provider as a convention for our property.

> In a project where `java` plugin was applied we can use the task as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a project where the `java` plugin was applied, we can use the task as follows:
```

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/java/toolchain-task/kotlin/",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=custom-toolchain-task-with-java-usage]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/java/toolchain-task/groovy/",files="build.gradle[tags=custom-toolchain-task-with-java-usage]"]
====
<1> The toolchain defined on the `java` extension is used by default to resolve the launcher.
<2> The custom task without additional configuration will use the default Java 8 toolchain.
<3> The other task overrides the value of the launcher by selecting a different toolchain using `javaToolchains` service.

> In a case when a task needs access to toolchains without `java` plugin being applied the toolchain service can be used directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a task needs access to toolchains without the `java` plugin being applied, the toolchain service can be used directly.
```

> If an <<#sec:configuring_toolchain_specifications, unconfigured>> toolchain spec is provided to the service it will always return a tool provider for the toolchain that is running Gradle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an <<#sec:configuring_toolchain_specifications, unconfigured>> toolchain spec is provided to the service, it will always return a tool provider for the toolchain that is running Gradle.
```

This can be achieved by passing an empty lambda when requesting a tool: `javaToolchainService.launcherFor({})`.

> You can find more details on how to define custom tasks in the <<more_about_tasks.adoc#sec:more_about_tasks, Authoring tasks>> documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find more details on defining custom tasks in the <<more_about_tasks.adoc#sec:more_about_tasks, Authoring tasks>> documentation.
```
